Years later, Harding referred to Willis during this period as "the 'lion' of the town".
Willis began publishing poetry in his father's Boston Periodical, often using one of two literary personalities under the pen names "Roy" (for religious subjects) and "Cassius" (for more secular topics).
The same year, Willis published a volume of poetical Sketches.
That year, Willis founded the American Monthly Magazine, which began publishing in April 1829 until it was discontinued in August 1831.
The work became popular and boosted Willis's literary reputation enough that an American edition was soon issued.
The couple moved to London where, in 1836, Willis met Charles Dickens, who was working for the Morning Chronicle at the time.
On October 20, 1838, Willis began a series of articles called "A New Series of Letters from London", one of which suggested an illicit relationship between writer Letitia Elizabeth Landon and editor William Jordan.
Later that year, Willis attended a ball in honor of Charles Dickens in New York.
Nearly two decades later, Jacobs would write in her fictionalized autobiography Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl, which she began composing while working for the Willis family, that she "was convinced that ...
As a critic, Willis did not believe in including discussions of personalities of writers when reviewing their works.
While Willis was editor of the Evening Mirror, its issue for January 29, 1845, included the first printing of Poe's poem "The Raven" with his name attached.
Even so, Willis published many pieces of what would later be referred to as "The Longfellow War", a literary battle between Poe and the supporters of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, whom Poe called overrated and guilty of plagiarism.
Willis also introduced Poe to Fanny Osgood; the two would later carry out a very public literary flirtation.
In 1846, Willis and Morris left the Evening Mirror and attempted to edit a new weekly, the National Press, which was renamed the Home Journal after eight months.
Harriet Jacobs was re-hired by Willis to work for the family.
During these last years at Idlewild, Willis continued contributing a weekly letter to the Home Journal.
Willis, however, did not encourage his sister's writings.
Willis did not publicly protest but in private he asserted that, despite his fictitious equivalent, he had done his best to support his sister during her difficult times, especially after the death of her first husband.
Willis had complained that his magazine writing prevented him from writing a longer work.
The Home Journal lost many subscribers during the American Civil War, Morris died in 1864, and the Willis family had to take in boarders and for a time turned Idlewild into a girls' school for income.
Willis built up his reputation in the public at a time when readers were interested in the personal lives of writers.
His travel writings in particular were popular for this reason as Willis was actually living the life he was describing and recommending to readers.
For a time, it was said that Willis was the "most-talked-about author" in the United States.